# Introduction to the project

I love logical languages. When I first found out about Lojban, I was fascinated by its apparent elegance, simplicity and regularity. I watched a tutorial that explained basic sentence structure and was amazed by how far only a few simple rules can go.

I didn't end up learning it. I had no idea there was any community of speakers and in the time before learning Lojban, I learned Toki Pona. I initially was interested in Toki Pona for the same reason everyone else is: the promise of learning a whole language without much effort. But I quickly became frustrated with its limitations and moved on to Lojban. It was useful in teaching myself how to teach myself languages though!

When I did learn Lojban, I found that it was not nearly as simple as I expected. While some cmavo groups form patterns like FA, there are other cmavo groups that are totally unpredictable in form. Additionally, Lojban is actually filled with irregularities such as rafsi, which are similar in difficulty to learn as grammatical gender. They're an annoying extra bit of "metadata" you have to learn to associate with most words you learn.

Lojban's grammar is very complex. It has over 500 particles and dozens of particle groups. These groups all vary in their grammar significantly with confusing and unintuitive interactions between them.

I see plenty of missed opportunities in Lojban for regularity and optimisation. That makes sense because it was only the second ever logical language. But Lojban does get one significant thing right: it can be parsed without any knowledge of what root words mean. In a sense, anyway. Without knowing root words, the parser cannot catch things like `mi sipna do` that are unambiguously mistakes. It also can't tell you if your logic is correct, which is a major weakness in a logical language.

Toaq, a language that corrects the parsing and logic weaknesses of Lojban, goes about it in a way I consider extremely hostile to beginners or really anyone with the level of proficiency it's reasonable to expect in a conlang. It demands absolute fluency in order to parse correctly because the parser must know the structure or "predicate class" of every word in order to know where phrases terminate. I also consider this to be a major practical weakness as any parser is obsolete the moment a new word is added to the dictionary. Toaq is also designed with a naturalistic aesthetic and highly opinionated grammar that I do not find appealing.

I want to create the language I thought Lojban was from just the brief descriptions I learned about it from. I consider ease of learning and ease of use to be important considerations as I'd like this language to eventually have a large speaker base. Wherever possible, the grammar will be designed to be regular and transparent, making as many parsing clues available to a non-fluent speaker as possible.

# Overall goals of this language
* **Minimalist**: Nothing like BAI will be in this language. Wherever possible, meaning will be handled by root words with particles just taking on the role of organising how they relate to one another. A way of thinking about this goal is asking "if this language were invented by aliens with nothing culturally in common with humans, would it still have grammar feature X?". If the answer is no, it does not belong in this language.
* **Transparent**: The language will not need a predicate dictionary to be parsed in a powerful and logically consistent way. This will be achieved by exposing any hidden information in Lojban or Toaq in the forms of predicate words. Particle classes will be instantly recognisable as they are in Eberban. Hopefully, even the way that particles change a sentence's structure could be encoded in particle form, giving further parsing clues to non-fluent users.
* **Uniform**: I am planning for nouns to be a special case of subclauses. Ideally as many particles as possible will just start subclauses with some specific interpretation. The full implications of this goal are something to work out as the grammar is built.
* **Logical**: I aim to make a loglang in the very strict sense of every sentence having an umambiguous translation into predicate logic. The logical system has not been chosen yet.
* **Pragmatic**: This is a conlang that recognises it's a conlang. It will optimistically only ever be spoken by a handful of people, likely in a discord server. As seen in other goals, the needs of a hypothetical beginner or intermediate speaker are very important to me. Aside from the vocabulary, there should be ideally *nothing* that would make a beginner say "but why do I need to memorise all that arbitrary nonsense?". There should ideally be consistent patterns within particle families so that learning a particle family's meaning prepares the learner to start instantly using the whole family without needing to separately memorise each one. Lojban achieves this in some cases and Eberban is significantly better at it. Vocabulary minimalism is not part of this goal, and is not being pursued at all. It is my opinion that Toki Pona proves that small vocabularies are just big vocabularies but undocumented, so a large vocabulary is more helpful to learners.
* **Compact**: Obviously allowing monosyllabic predicates goes a long way here, but ideally very few particles should be necessary in most sentences. Scope inflection allows for most instances of Lojban requiring terminators to be done away with, and putting the number of noun places in every predicate allows for word orders that "wrap around" from object or indirect object back to subject to allow for more unmarked word orders than Lojban. I also have plans to eliminate the need for a BE-like construction, making it have no syllable cost in many cases. Lojban's use of verb-first sentences to skip the subject will be copied as it creates more opportunities for compact sentences. There is free word order.